[Music]
when you have empathy with someone
they're more likely to be open because
they feel that you're with them
and you can't do anything to show to
them you're just empathetic and it just
occurs
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease my name is Brett
Kistler I'm an adventurer entrepreneur
and a self-exploration Enthusiast I'm
here with my co-host Joe Hudson Joe is a
business coach who spent decades working
with some of the world's top Executives
and teams developing a unique model of
human patterns that underpin how we
operate with ourselves each other and
the world a good entry point into this
model is a mindset called view
vulnerability impartiality empathy and
wonder through understanding and
cultivation we learn to easefully drop
into the view State of Mind deepening
self-awareness and increasing our
connection with the world around us to
learn more about this podcast or courses
visit art of accomplishment.com
foreign
we often see a world where emotions are
held inside and remain unseen by others
filtered out as distractions we might
focus on the business stuff that is the
logistics and agreements that seem more
relevant than the feelings behind them
even in our personal lives intense
reactions from others can feel like a
distraction from the connection that we
want what if learning to be acutely
aware of others internal experiences can
give us more useful information than the
words they speak how can our personal
and professional relationships change as
we learn to notice and address the hurt
behind an angry attack or the fear
behind a hasty agreement
this is the practice of empathy the e in
view
Joe how do you Define empathy
so hard uh empathy is so much of a
feeling more than it is an intellectual
understanding but
I would say it's being with somebody's
experience without losing yourself in it
that's what I would say empathy is so
it's not watching somebody's experience
and it's not wanting to change
somebody's experience
it's being with them in the experience
without losing yourself in it give me an
example so oftentimes when I'm working
with clients for instance they'll be all
agitated around something and I'll just
ask a simple question like is this yours
you know recently
um there's some covet anxiety that one
of my clients was feeling and I was like
is this yours
and then like just immediately drop
they're like oh no it's not mine
so that's one way that's why when you're
in it
um the other way is the other way to
define kind of what it isn't so to speak
is like you see this all the time with
babies crying
so baby starts crying and some people
get instantly annoyed and some people
can be with that crime and that's really
a
deep expression of their capacity to
have empathy in that moment there's
actually something biologically that
happens too after baby quest for an
extended period of time for man their
testosterone increases but in those
first couple minutes of crying
our capacity to empathize with that
child or be agitated by that child
uh is really is really kind of the that
linchpin
okay you said earlier this question is
it yours what do you mean by that
oftentimes highly empathetic people
um kind of go beyond empathy what the
way I would Define empathy and they
would go beyond it and then they're not
being able to tell what's their
emotional state and what's another
person's emotional state this really
happens to people who were like children
of Alcoholics or children of abuse
people who
had to survive by knowing the emotional
state of somebody when they walk into
the room and so they can very much get
lost in the other person's emotions and
think that they're theirs
we have these things called mirror
neurons in our brain and and they
basically allow us to feel the state of
other people on some level and
and
sometimes when we're feeling somebody
else we forget it's that we're feeling
them that it's not us that's feeling
that way and in a weird way we start
feeling that way so then it's really
even more confusing because then you're
like oh I'm feeling it but if you ask
yourself the question hey is this mine
and then that can clarify a lot
yeah that makes a lot of sense the idea
of mirror neurons is a is a little bit
interesting it's the way I see it is
that basically our entire system all of
our Consciousness is kind of mirroring
our reality in some way it has it
mirroring and like correlating perfectly
with it and then losing ourselves or are
we
correlating with it and being with it
and experiencing it and learning from it
yeah I think mirror neurons and
neurology is such a mystery still you
know what what is it that allows
is this some form of mirror neuron that
allows a whole bunch of birds to know
how to turn at the exact same moment
like like it's a it's there's something
particularly around mammals where
there's most mammals communicate without
any words and so they're really relying
on their ability to sense the
experience of the other animals
yeah the social nervous system yeah so
tell me tell me how practicing empathy
will benefit us
what does this do for us
uh well one of the great benefits is
that if anything that you have a hard
time empathizing with means that you
have a hard time with that emotional
state for yourself
so that's fantastic
um because our decision making process
is really based on emotions right if I
take the emotional Center of your brain
away you cease to make decisions it
would take you half an hour to decide
what color pen so we're really making
decisions based on trying to feel or
trying not to feel certain emotions
whether we like it or not whether we
think we're being logical or not
you know if that emotional Center of
your brain gets taken away you still
have all the intellect you still have
all the rationale but you still can't
make the decisions so it really helps us
clarify our decision making it
um really allows us to help us be with
our own emotional so and to discover
where we're having a hard time being
with our own emotions
and if you think about your life in this
way if you think about like how much of
your life has been decided by
you know
I don't want to feel like a failure or I
want to feel like a success or I don't
want to feel unhappy how many decisions
have you made based on that criteria
and to be able to be with all of your
emotions
what will that do if you look forward to
all of your emotions what will that do
to your decision making
and how does it change your emotional
state right if I have sadness and I
don't want to feel it it feels very
different than if I have sadness and I
want to feel it
so those are like a lot of the things
that will benefit us on an inward
perspective externally obviously you
know people like it when other people
are with them you know I if you think
about your friends and the people you
feel closest to in the world you can
find that they're more able to be with
you than people who you don't
particularly like and if you look at
your friends and you say what is it
about your friends that you want to have
changed you know oftentimes it's it fits
into the category of their inability to
be with you or see you for who you are
um so there's that whole thing too right
where it's just like we want to be
empathized with most of us want to be
empathized with and
and so it just uh creates deeper
connection more loving more capacity to
love seems like the the first half of
what you described is like feeling into
our emotions to find out where our
thoughts and rationale are coming from
and then in others being able to see
behind that too so if somebody if
somebody's presenting you with a
solution or an idea
um whether it's a business context or
you know relationship to be able to see
behind that what the feeling is that
that's coming from can allow you to
address a deeper root cause or need yeah
at least it gives you the capacity to do
it um you know sometimes people get
upset if you do that you know it's like
wow it really doesn't seem like you're
angry it seems like you're hurt no I'm
not you know that kind of
um right but but generally it goes
pretty well and people want to deal with
the underlying thing you know so many so
many logical arguments are really not at
all about the logic it's not really
about the tactics or the facts I mean
just look at most public discourse it's
not really about the facts
it's it's about the emotional state of
people and their fear and what they need
and what they want and what they're
angry about so yeah to be able to
connect with people on that level and to
not tell them that they need to be
different but to actually be with them
it's a huge capacity it really allows
you to have a much deeper authentic
relationship or communication with
people yeah I think the public discourse
is a great example because a lot of
people get so triggered around other
people believing different facts than
them and I think that that's really just
coming from a lack of feeling seen yeah
or or a feeling of that they're out of
control in their world or that they're
helpless or that there's forces Beyond
them that are controlling them or right
so many emotions are happening there
yeah so earlier you said you said this a
couple of times to be with somebody in
their experience without losing yourself
how do you prevent that
the easiest way to do it I mean it's
just a really simple way is just put
some attention in your own body
while you're with somebody if you're if
you happen to be that type that has that
deep empathy in you lose yourself in the
person the kind of the traditional way
people do it is they become defensive
they just hold a level of defense and
they're like
and that works
um
but it doesn't allow you to be
empathetic it just prevents you from
getting lost in them to be empathetic in
a successful way is to maintain a
certain amount of your awareness in your
own body so like right now when you're
listening to me
you could also be paying attention to
the bottom of your feet where you could
also be paying attention to how the
sound of this podcast feels in your ear
in your inner ear
and then that allows you to be with
yourself while listening to me
and being with me in my experience it's
about as easy as that just putting some
attention in your own body
and the other kind of more intellectual
way
is to just be aware of when it's
happening I think that's the biggest
challenge for most people is that they
just don't know when it's happening and
a great sign that it's happening is if
you buy into the story of whatever
anybody is saying
you know let's say you have a friend and
they're like oh my boyfriend
the world my boss and if you're like
yeah you've been victimized and we need
to do something about it it's like you
pretty much if you're in them now
or just the opposite you know these
people are bad yeah and then you're in
them uh if you buy into the story
if you are
with them emotionally but you know that
the story that they're telling is
true within their context but not true
within everybody's context then you're
pretty much not lost in them this sounds
very non-intellectual and a lot of
people a lot of people are going to want
to try to understand this more what
would you say to folks who want to
understand or analyze emotions or just
have that have that tendency or just
want to analyze this process yeah
yeah you're you're screwed is I would
say I mean we can we can tell you good
story I mean we're doing it right now
we're telling you good stories about it
um but it's not going to really help
empathy is a felt sense uh it's like say
you close your eyes and you know where
your left foot is right that that's
called proprioception it's knowing where
your body is in in space
like how do you describe that logically
right you can describe what it is
logically potentially but you can't
really describe how to do it logically
so similar with like going to the
bathrooms like how do you know when
you're done going to the bathroom like
where's the logic are you measuring
something you know are you
are you timing it no yeah there's just a
felt sense oh that's done so it's the
same thing empathy is a felt sense and
felt sense can't really be described by
the intellect with any kind of
um accuracy like it's like looking at
color how do you
how do you describe seeing green
you know that it's like it requires a
label that is arbitrary
so
so logic isn't really going to do any
good here for that uh and it's why it's
so easy to dismiss things like empathy
and
um energy or whatever words people are
using
um but there's a felt sense to it and I
think you find this in a lot of things
um prayer or meditation it's really easy
to dismiss those things even if you hear
the logic behind them until you feel
them and then once you have a felt sense
of what prayer can do
whether you believe in a God or not
um
or what the felt sense of believing in a
God is like and what the felt sense of
not believing in a God is like
you know all those things they're very
felt sense and so you can argue it night
and day but it's why nobody changes
their mind on this stuff until they have
a change of felt sense
so if you want a logical
conversation about empathy go and feel
people go and be empathetic and stay in
yourself while you do it
and and that's a far better way just
experiment
that seems to be you know I mean that is
true across all of these uh view
podcasts is that these are all pointers
intellectual pointers to something that
you ultimately need to feel into yeah
they're all I mean that's why often
times in these conversations they could
be logically contradictory
it's because we're just creating
Frameworks that make it easier to feel
into or
realize something
um it's it's not about telling it
like a a truth there's no you know it's
not it's not like there's one way or
there's something that's right here
there's just how do you want to be is
the question and that question isn't
answered with logic
I'm just feeling our way beneath any
fear response we have which brings me to
another question
um we've been talking about losing
yourself and the other person not being
empathy as you're defining it and losing
yourself near that person sounds a lot
like the flight fear response that we've
discussed before
um like fleeing from your experience
into there is to try to fix it and then
create you'll dive into a story about
why they have that experience and then
you'll create some idea of who's the
abuser or the Tyranny or the victim and
I imagine there's something equivalent
that we do in the fight in the freeze
responses as well how do these other
forms of fear impact our ability to be
present with others in their reactions
right yeah so it's I mean it's if you
think about it from an evolutionary
sense uh right so we have
fear it's not if you're really scared
it's really not time to empathize and so
so that part of your brain goes offline
and you know your fear response comes
online
um so
if you are in
um flight like you said you're you're uh
looking at the the world around you the
environment and the actors in that
environment and you're trying to figure
out how to manage those uh if you are in
fight then immediately that emotion that
you're starting to feel in your system
is going to make you angry and you're
going to try to stop it
like the angry uh person on the plane
when the kid starts crying and the
freeze response is is a disassociation
it's like a checking out you can just
watch the eyes kind of haze over
it makes sense that fear when we're in
fear it's really hard to have any
empathy at all
so how do you how do you prevent this
Spirit response or or let it pass
through you or
what what do you do with this when this
when you know that you have a like a
deep bodily patterning to fear in a
particular business context or a
relationship context you feel it that's
the that's the trick to all of this
stuff is like how do you feel the
emotion
and and I say feel it I don't mean like
be taken away by it you know there's
just some saying that I heard the other
day it was beautiful and I think it's
from some Supreme Court Judge I don't
know but it said I wouldn't give you a
fig for the Simplicity on this side of
complexity but I'll give you my whole
world for the Simplicity on the other
side of complexity
and what it's speaking to is that
before we start our learning process
things are pretty simple then we started
learning processes it gets really
complex and somewhere along the line it
gets very simple again
and with emotions it's very simple for a
two-year-old I feel angry and so I'm
gonna yell at you or punch you or
and then there's the complexity of
actually learning what those emotions
are what's happening identifying them in
your body feeling them expressing them
expressing them in a way that doesn't
hurt people
letting them move without resistance
finding out that they're very similar to
one another finding out that you can
love all of them getting to the other
side is wow you just have emotions again
and it's just they're just fluid except
for you're not run by them
you're not controlled by them you're not
hurting other people with them so the
only way to do that is to actually learn
how to feel the fear so
if you have a fear response feel it and
invite it in don't put it at anybody
and most fear is not wanting to feel
something which is pretty cool when you
think about it like
you know I'm
scared that I'm gonna get fired but if I
told you hey if you get fired you're
going to feel awesome
I feel like would you would you be
scared of me being fired anymore so it's
really us not wanting to have emotions
that we're we're at the core very scared
of and and when I say feel the fear I
mean welcome it I really mean like
invited in breathe it in
what's a good way to tell in the moment
if we're working on empathy and how do
we tell if what we're feeling in the
moment is true empathy and not one of
these uh coping mechanisms or
distortions and another one that comes
up is sympathy there's a lot about how
sympathy and empathy are different
and often confused it's a wonderful
question the the main thing is are you
putting yourself outside
um it's not quite outside it's above or
yeah I guess it's above the other person
that's often sympathy and empathy the
difference is in when you're putting
yourself above the other person like
subtle ways like you want to fix them
but you know for you to fix them you
have to be less broken or you want to
like help them not feel it you know
which is assuming that like not you're
not feeling it is a better solution
um so right and that means buying into
their story and being within the story
like oh yeah yeah
exactly so so it's just you're with them
and and when you're with somebody the
way that you know we all want to be with
it's like we're supporting we are with
but we are not saving there's this great
phrase that uh I think it was from an
Aboriginal
Community or a native community in South
America
um
it says hey if you're here to help me no
thank you but if you're here to work
together on our mutual Freedom let's get
to work
and that's really the essence of it
another thing that's that happens a lot
is that um like being empathic is is
often associated with being manipulable
or easily taken for an emotional ride
and how could it be that that deepening
our empathy in the ways that we've been
talking about makes us less likely to
fall into a fear response and abandon
our needs or our boundaries yeah right
there's there's a you get that fear a
lot from people that are like oh if I
empathize then I'm going to fall for
them and I think that what they're
they're thinking about is that is that
person who's like fully into the other
person's reality and they they've lost
themselves in it and if you do that yeah
you're you're more likely to be
um taken advantage of I mean if that's
what the person wants to do on the other
side or is capable of doing
um but you know in all cases
we don't want to feel something if we're
if we're allowing ourselves to be taken
advantage of right so I'm going to sell
you
you know this magic pill and it's going
to make you skinny in two days
right like if you buy that it's because
you don't want to feel something anymore
or you definitely want to feel something
so there is something that you want to
feel or scared of feeling to allow
yourself to be taken advantage of and to
have empathy it really requires you to
be willing to feel whatever is arising
for yourself and that other person
so it actually prevents you from getting
taken advantage of because you're
welcoming of everything and you're not
trying to get rid of it and it doesn't
matter whether you're non-empathetic or
like
you know where it's like I'm not going
to feel that person that means you don't
want to feel it means that you can
be taken advantage of pretty easily I
mean just look at the most
non-empathetic people in on our planet
and they are the most likely to be
um manipulated by politicians or
you know authorities are advertising and
then the other side of that is someone
who's totally like in that other
person's world and then they're going to
sacrifice themselves for it but if
you're actually like oh I can feel you I
can be with you
and whatever you throw at me I can feel
I can be with what makes you need to do
anything that is contrary to your truth
yeah it seems another example of that is
you know in a business relationship or
somebody's coming at you with a bunch of
emotion and making you responsible for
something that you're not responsible
for well if you're if you're with them
in that emotion but you're like buying
into their full story then you're gonna
think that they're entirely right you're
going to lose your boundaries
and be taken for a ride yeah absolutely
if you agree with if somebody thinks
that you're bad and and you get locked
into their emotion then you start
thinking you're bad yeah that's exactly
a great place where you're going to be
taking advantage of by somebody who
doesn't think they're taking advantage
of you
it's my it's by somebody who who feels
like they're a victim in that moment
typically right yeah so so back to back
to what you were saying about the people
who are
you know the least empathic are the ones
that are most likely to be taken for a
ride uh many of us simply don't seem to
feel emotions in others as much as we'd
like
um and when we start doing this kind of
work is when we start to notice this uh
when I when I started to work with you I
experienced certain emotions in others
when we were doing exercises like kind
of like I was watching them as an ant
colony like I could see and recognize
the patterns but I wasn't in it with
them like oh I didn't have an alcoholic
father that's not my problem like I'd
like I can see what that does in you and
now I can see your problem and I think I
can try to analyze how to fix you
and how can we tell the difference
between observing someone's experience
in a non-empathic way and genuinely
being with them yeah the body is a
Telltale sign here um I mean I think I
remember that when we were working
together and you're doing that and I
believe I came up and shook you a couple
times
and you'd like and then you could
feel a different way there's a rigidity
that happens in the body when you are
trying not to feel no matter how you're
trying not to feel whether it's by
creating distance or disassociation
which is somewhat of what you were doing
um being The Watcher or or wanting it to
stop any one of them it just creates
rigidity in the system so if you and
this often happens in the belly
shoulders a jaw is locked oftentimes
when when I do
a workshop like this one I'll walk
around and I'll like hit people's Jaws
so that like tap their jaws to remind
them like oh they're holding all this
tight or their belly is really tight so
that's a that's the main way is to
keep your body loose and you'll have to
feel our feelings are a muscular thing
our feelings live in our um and our
muscles if you're the person who was
told you can't get angry and you are not
angry
all the time now and anytime anger comes
up you either like give it to yourself
or
suppress it really badly your muscles
have to contract in such a way and
become distorted in such a way it's why
there's a whole science behind just
watching how somebody walks into a room
you can tell like a tremendous amount of
their upbringing
you know like once once you know what
you're looking for and you've
experienced it yourself
you can the way a person's face is you
can tell what emotions they want to feel
or they don't want to feel by the way
they hunch their shoulders by the way
they tuck their butt by the way that
they hold their lips how they purse them
when certain things come up like they're
it's it is
why we have body language and it's why
we have Micro Expressions yeah something
I've noticed over over doing this work
is that I've started to detect when when
somebody's disconnecting from me in a
conversation
I can roll back a little bit and
recognize that I had actually
disconnected from them and then they're
like they're responding to that yeah and
it's it's as though the feeling for them
is the difference between being with a
friend with a good friend who's there
with them and their experience and being
with a shrink who's psychoanalyzing them
yeah I think that happens a lot for
people for people who want to be there
to help others a lot of it comes from
you know wanting to deal with their own
their own pain their own history so I
think this happens a lot in like
therapeutic
communities where where people take the
therapeutic role
but they're really analyzing and they're
not being empathic yeah it happens
definitely in some places there and it
happens just with a lot of people who
find themselves like the Savior or
helper of their group of friends
you'll see a lot of that happen and and
the truth is what sometimes what that is
is
they're trying to manage their life by
managing other people's emotional states
you know like if if you feel happy I'll
be happy if you if you're angry if
you're not angry I'll be happy
you know if you're in a good mood I'm in
a good mood and um and then hey it
doesn't work and and B you can't change
people's emotional states and see it's
just far more enjoyable to be with them
in the emotional state
yeah yeah which comes back to that
self-empathy thing we were talking about
like as I've experienced my my ability
to actually have empathy with others has
directly grown from my ability to
actually feel that equivalent feeling in
myself yeah that's right that's exactly
how it works it's uh our capacity to
love the parts of ourselves
is directly correlated to our capacity
to love the parts of other people and
other people in general yeah
sometimes being empathic with somebody
and holding a highly charged emotion can
leave us with a sort of static residue
in our system and it can linger or put
us on tilt and it takes takes time for
integration yeah
um or just leave us leave us feeling
that thing for days
um and for some people this is really
strong yeah
um the empaths the self-identified
empaths will just avoid certain
situations because they're like well I
just can't I can't handle that energy
how can we navigate this and be
deepening our empathy without closing
ourselves off or avoiding situations
especially if we're frequently going
from one high energy interaction to
another in business or something else
yeah yeah I had to learn that really the
hard way
um for me you know when I started
coaching people and and you know the
depth and which the coaching can happen
and
I would go from that to like a
conversation with negotiating lawyers
over like
over like points on a contract and so
and then back into a coaching session so
I had to go into these like big highly
charged thing one right after the other
and similarly when I do like the seven
day really deep Retreats it's like one
like emotional baseball bat after
another
in the best possible way it's not like
with real baseball
right but not not obviously not hurting
anybody and
um and so
yeah it's something that I really had to
learn
um you know the the main thing is avoid
it and the way you avoid it isn't by not
feeling the emotion it's by being in
your body right so it's it's
just
um putting some of your attention in
your body while you're with other people
in their emotions so you're not losing
yourself that's a huge thing
um
and if you do that as you get better at
that it's like it that takes care of
about 70 or 80 of the problem and then
the other stuff it's really about
grounding it's about staying grounded
realizing what's yours and what's not
yours um and your body and your breath
is the best way to do this so releasing
whatever emotion residue you have
letting the tears flow shaking it off
grounding yourself in the different ways
that people can ground themselves
there's some Tai Chi moves that can do
that yoga moves that ground you
um there's just asking is this mine you
know that was a really good one from
earlier yeah is this mine
there are some things to calm the
nervous system down different breath
um so there's all sorts of things you
can look into any if you go into any
kind of system that says how do I ground
no matter what kind of system from
you know functional medicine to
to this you can just find those things
and they'll work really well I like my
personal favorites are like deep breath
um walking barefoot
um
sitting in silence meditation those
things I feel very grounded and those
things massage I love massage will help
me feel grounded probably quicker than
anything else
but if you're going straight from like a
Sprint planning meeting where
everybody's start got an argument
started yelling at each other and you're
carrying that energy straight into a
performance review and you really want
not to take that out on the person that
you're reviewing yeah yeah
I took out like five minutes between
them yeah so first I wouldn't buy into
the story that you have to so I would
say like I'm not prepared for this
meeting right now emotionally and I'd
rather give you the
the actual emotional attention that you
deserve so let's postpone it that's one
thing obviously
like so for instance if there is a big
fight in the Sprint meeting I I would
probably enjoy it because I could be
with I could be with the anger the
energy and I'd see like wow look at all
these people who really give a they
really care they really want it done
right or they wouldn't be fighting
um and then my way better than a bunch
of apathetic right exactly checked out
people exactly and and and because I
would be enjoying the tension it would
also change the dynamic in the room of
the anger because so much of the
fighting that happens is based on a
level of resistance because unresisted
fighting you know feels very much like
Clarity and decisiveness and a deep care
so
um so so again staying in your own
physical sensation is a huge part to
prevent it but
I mean literally just shake your body
for you know two or three minutes
between the meetings can work
um taking deep breaths can work uh
getting in touch with what's aware of
your emotional state instead of your
emotional state can work
yawning 10 20 times in a row can work
having a you know a quick cry crying
doesn't take very long can be a minute
or two all those things can work
can you can you tell me a couple of
stories about how empathy transformed a
situation for you in a business context
something like this or different yeah
uh yeah you know I I remember a time
when I was fundraising
um and you know we're you know I can't
remember so you know somewhere in like
that 10 million dollar range of
fundraising and
I just noticed that I was with the
person who I was talking to and I
noticed
um that they were getting distant
and um and I I just said wow I noticed
that you're getting distant I noticed
something turned you off what happened
and that is what allowed for a far
deeper conversation about what they were
looking for
what about my attitude had scared them
we could address it directly uh I could
I got to learn
that I was
objectifying the person probably a
little bit more than I would want to and
and they could learn that they were in a
past deal not in the current deal in
front of us
so
that that's a good example of one same
thing raising money I have been able to
empathize with the people
on the other side of the table to
realize that oh they see me as a they've
objectified me or they see me as a
employee
rather than a partner and I don't want
that I think investors who see
um peop their investees and employees I
think that they are dangerous and you
can sense it and by the way that they
keep a distance from you or
how they hold themselves emotionally
with you instead of the way somebody who
holds you as a partner
so that is prevented me from having some
really bad investors that way
another example is like selling like
oftentimes you see in a sales process a
customer goes into resistance and then
the salesperson tries to convince them
which puts them into more resistance
right instead of saying being like well
I know I noticed something is not
working for you what's going on because
if this isn't working for you I don't
want you to do it and if it's not
working for you there's a potential
there's a misunderstanding so I'd like
to clarify it
but I don't want you doing something you
don't want to do because then I just
have an unhappy customer and you know
that's not good for business
right
um You can't really do that unless you
can feel the person
um what are some uh some other examples
like working with peers for example yeah
or teams within a team yeah
yeah so for instance
um you know I hear something from
managers all the time where they're
talking about they're like you know we
all have alignment and then like nobody
did it we all agreed we all sat in the
meeting we all agreed and nobody did it
and I'll always say like let's in that
meeting did it feel like there was did
you feel like they were excited
no I'm like okay so
What stopped you from saying wow I don't
feel the excitement in the room what's
preventing the excitement
but you can't do that with anything
besides empathy so that's a great
experience of like if you are addressing
the emotional reality instead of just
intellectual reality because people like
I said make decisions based on emotions
that's why people can all agree to
something in a meeting but if they're
emotionally resistant they're not going
to go and do it
so you can actually just feel into that
resistance
feel into where the excitement is feel
into what's being held
where the rigidity is in the room and
and clarified and that makes things far
more
good it's the same thing with like
product development you know we have the
you know it's a kind of a famous thing
where people spend a lot of money on a
focus group and then and the focus group
goes this is great and then the product
fails
or right or vice versa has happened too
it's because they're asking them
emotional issues they're asking them
about emotional decisions through the
intellect and so it's not a perfect it
sometimes works but it's not a perfect
um
translator right it's like yeah it's
really
feeling your customer it's really
feeling what's making that what what
makes it important for them to buy it
you know Henry Ford said if I gave my
customers what they wanted I would have
given them a faster horse
but you put a person behind the car and
you see them drive it and what happens
to their face and you see the way people
look at them and what happens in their
faces
it's pretty clear who's going to buy
what
I almost thought that one was
interesting the faster horse thing
because it's not really what they wanted
if you asked them what they wanted if
you asked him the solution that they
thought they would have like that would
have solved their problem they might
have thought a faster horse
but really what they wanted was better
transportation yes exactly but that
that's the that's the exact point which
is that the um
that the intellect is limited in its
capacity to see
what the emotions want
yeah right so Transportation was horse
and feet you know at the time so that
was the limitation of the intellectual
part of it but if you got if you look at
the emotional experience then you know
that there's other Solutions
yeah I mean I think this happens in like
product research all the time where the
research will be will be conducted in
some way where it's like okay do what do
you like better the red plastic or the
blue plastic and you'll get an answer
and you'll have a a meeting where
there's a graph that just shows you know
how much of the market wants this versus
the other thing but you missed the
deeper question and the deeper emotional
connection to the product yeah that's
exactly right yeah it's why there's a
felt sense to Great design
you know you see something that's
designed just with beauty and you feel
it and you're like oh that's that's
beautiful not not just
beautiful as in looking but the design
is elegant and there's a there's a felt
sense to that and it makes it appealing
to us
and there's no way that you're gonna use
the intellect to describe that unless
you've been trained and designed for
you know years
so so how how will we see our lives and
our our work change as we deepen our
ability to feel our emotions and
empathize with others some of these
examples are good good examples but what
are some other things that would happen
in our lives
decisions become more clear because
we're more likely to feel
emotions and be happy to feel emotions
um we start caring for people instead of
caretaking them meaning that we're not
trying to
make them feel better we're just being
in support of them and therefore we get
that in return as well you get more
people who are happy to be with you
um you also see the people around
yourself and you become more and more
empowered right like as you stop fearing
all these emotional states
then you just stand in your truth more
and more and more
and so there's just a deeper level of
empowerment that happens for you and for
the people around you it you know one of
these things that I was working with a a
CEO of one of the companies and he he
you know tended towards um
caretaking and obviously because he's
caretaking there's a lot of people that
kind of fall into that victim thing in
this company and there's kind of like
this victim mentality in the company
because he felt responsible for them and
has that changed for him as he could be
with people instead of taking care of
people all of a sudden the decisions
that could Empower them could start to
be seen
so instead of coming in and saying like
here's how we're going to fix the world
he would say how do you want to fix the
world yeah I clearly you're unhappy how
are you going to fix it
you know he would Empower people to fix
their own problems and uh changed
everything for his company you know you
can just use my name when you're talking
about me
no that wasn't you that you were not the
person in my mind when I was saying no I
know but I just like felt it as like yep
that's that's exactly been my journey
yeah so what what else happens are there
a lot of times when we do these kinds of
practices there are shifts in our lives
that are like short-term uncomfortable
or destabilizing is there anything like
that that would happen with with
practicing deeper empathy yeah as the
emotions start to get felt and the
resistance isn't worked through it can
be a bit turbulent you know it's not the
emotions that are uncomfortable it's a
resistance to them so
um there can be a little bit of
turbulence there can be
you know moments of Tears where you were
preferred that there wasn't tears
um they don't happen very often they're
pretty rare like people kind of are like
oh my God I'm gonna be crying all over
the place and it's kind of more like oh
God I cried at this one place and and
actually somebody came up to me and said
something sweet
but yeah it can be a little bit
turbulent
um there's just also this idea that like
if I allow my emotions and they're gonna
take over me and control me it's like
it's the projection that you've been
controlling your emotions so you think
they're going to control you it doesn't
happen like that I've never seen anybody
at all of the thousands of people I've
seen go through this process I've never
seen any of them
like are like I'm controlled by emotions
now it's just yeah yeah damn you Joe
exactly never has never happened
um so I'd say that
um the biggest thing is what we've
really harped on on this and this talk
is you know if you empathize without
with losing yourself that can be uh that
can be really damaging so learning how
to
be in your own body while you're
empathetic is like so critical I just
even recommend like hey
for the rest of the week put some of
your attention into your physical body
during every conversation see what that
like see what that does to your world it
it will like it'll rock your world if
you do that for um every conversation
for a week it'll just rock your world
and it's also I just say it's important
to take it slow you know it's like uh I
would say it's like if the emotional
tube is kinked you know you just like be
gentle with the unkinking take it slow
yeah there's the there's the wisdom in
the taking it slow and there's also
another side of that that I can see like
a lot of times these these emotions are
stacked on each other and so you get
beneath one of them and you let yourself
feel it like you might get yourself to
feel the anger
um but then if you don't feel the hurt
underneath the anger then a completely
different thing starts controlling you
yeah and so you get the you get the
disruptive thing going on in your life
and you're entering another pattern and
so there's there's like being gentle
with yourself and taking it slow and
then there's also just like being
curious about how far down it goes and
what's what's beneath this one that I'm
now feeling I would definitely agree
with that to think that there's an end
is no good it's not going to be
servicing your journey at all so seeing
it as endless being curious about it
bringing the other you know being
vulnerable with yourself about your
emotional state
um being impartial with how you feel you
can use all of those tools and use it
for this empathy and it might appeal and
it might be like you know you might find
yourself
balling and crying and shaking
and all that can happen while being
gentle with yourself what are some ways
that empathy can go like wrong
um what does it look like when it's
uh if we're like trying to be empathic
we're not quite there so it's shallow or
it's sort of false or how could it be
used directly as a weapon if somebody
you know starts using these practices
and they're like oh wow I could actually
use this to manipulate people
what happens then how does that look
creepy
you can see it you know you like
the difference between a good
interviewer and a bad interview is one's
using real empathy and one is Faking it
and you can tell it makes your skin
crawl on some level you know so
it might work for some people
um but it's not it's going to only work
on a small percentage of them whereas
empathy is is creates connection
consistently
you can use empathy as a tool they do
all these
skills are based on that you know mimic
their body language and
nod yes when people speak and blah blah
blah blah mirror the last three words of
the thing they said use their name in
the front of sentences and blah blah
blah yeah um you can do all that stuff
but if you're not being empathy it comes
off as false fake and gross and and
we've all been with that person but if
you could do all that stuff with deep
empathy and then it's it's actually
quite appealing but it's really the
empathy that's appealing and I think
that the reason that those tools work
when they do work sometimes is because
they actually hack the Mind into empathy
yeah yeah but yeah they're disarming
yeah and if the intent is to disarm then
it can get you closer to it yeah
to disarm yourself that is not to disarm
the other person as a trick yeah so what
are a couple of like summary bullet
points on how all of what we've
discussed would apply to a view
conversation in this practice and with
uh with the rest of this course yeah
well one of the things that the clearly
thing is that you can ask questions you
can ask how what questions
um that are based on non-verbal cues on
empathy
like oh wow it feels like you distance
yourself right there what happened or
you can say
it looks like you don't agree with that
what's going on or what's happening with
you right now or how did how did that
feel you can ask questions like that
people generally don't
they'll stay up on the intellectual and
they won't ask questions down in the in
the emotional
and in a curious way not not yes no wait
I saw you disconnect there I saw you
disconnect I know it tell me tell me
what
empathy is an attack
um yeah that's right
um also uh basically you'll notice that
when you have empathy with someone
they're more likely to be open because
they feel that you're with them and you
can't do anything to show to them you're
just empathetic and it just occurs
um like I said earlier there's this
creepy thing where people know you're
managing them and when they do they back
off
hence how you don't have as much data
you don't get as much truth you don't
get as you don't get to see the problem
as it is you don't get their ideas for
Solutions uh so with empathy you get all
that stuff you get more data and more
ideas for Solutions
or the solutions you get from them are
actually their solutions to get you to
stop exactly managing them exactly
exactly and also um uh if you're in
empathy you can catch yourself being
partial
right like if you're using empathy and
you see somebody like I have an issue
with you you're like oh wow it's being
partial like I'll catch my own
partiality from being empathetic to
their response to me right like the way
I was describing earlier when I met when
I catch somebody disconnected like
rolling back and be like wait a minute
yeah okay let's see what I did there
exactly yeah yeah as we close um I'd
love for you to to tell us about an
impactful experience that you've had
that caused the deepest increase in your
empathy for others in the shortest
amount of time yeah yeah I can I want to
give you two uh the first one was
I was having this experience where I
realized that I really just did not want
to be with people who were having
meaningless conversations
and it just was like so annoying like
you know I was driving 65 miles an hour
really 65 yeah 65 miles an hour
down to Santa Barbara like like it was
so frustrating for me
and like what is it that I don't want to
feel
what is it that's happening for them for
me that I don't want to feel and I'm
just open myself up to it it was awkward
you know I'd be weeping in these
conversations that were like seemingly
benign and
um I don't know two or three weeks of
that something maybe a month of that and
um the personal recognition that came
through was I was it it was so critical
to my sense of self that I had to be
valuable
and that the idea that I might be
spending time where I wasn't valuable it
was so hard on my system I didn't want
to feel
that kind of
sense of worthlessness and that was my
internal thing and then to have the
freedom to be worthless to be like oh
yeah I like I'm happy to be worthless
and I'm happy to be of value
and having that freedom was tremendous
and then my capacity to immediately be
with people or having that level of
conversation happening and what I
realized was even in that level of
conversation there's different forms of
connection going on
there's different ways that people are
connecting that aren't verbal that
aren't about the
immediate intellectual thing that's up
front and then um
I think the this one wasn't as quick but
it was bigger for me which was you know
getting in touch with hand-in-hand
parenting which is really um one of the
main tools that I've learned empathy
from
and one of the tools in that is like
it's called Parenting by connection and
it allows parents to be deeply connected
with their kids kids to feel deeply
connected in the thought processes when
kids are feel connected they naturally
want to behave in a way that's
that's enriching for themselves and the
family
and all of the tribulations that we feel
from children is just them being out of
connection so how do you get them back
into connection
and one of the tools they have five very
simple tools and one of the tools is is
stay listening it's like allowing the
kids to have temper tantrums and
and being with them in that temper
tantrum and even encouraging it to move
through and making sure it doesn't get
stuck and uh
and you know I was not good with my a
lot of my emotions when I started doing
hand-in-hand parenting
and I got good with them really quick
and all of a sudden I had a tremendous
amount of emotional Freedom that I
didn't have before and all of a sudden
my decision making got so clear
because
I couldn't be with my child's temper
tantrum until I could be with my own I
couldn't be with my child's anger until
I could be with my own or with their
tears until I could be with my own and
so that process of empathizing and being
with my children gave me so much more
freedom huh
how did these two stories impact the uh
your ability to
have value for people
but I don't care
[Laughter]
if I I mean if I were to look at it
seemingly I'm I'm more able to be more
valuable to them because I'm I can be
with them in a deeper way now and um I'm
not judging them or myself
so that it seems like that's probably
more valuable
but the bigger the bigger answer is I
don't it doesn't matter to me anymore
you know it's like
I love I love that Paradox from you know
from the like the driving wound of your
first story yeah to just not carrying
any more actually having that impact
yeah
oh man that was a great conversation
thanks so much Brett yeah thank you
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
in your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
foreign